impl: proposal for coding guidelines (#647)
eclipse-score/score: docs/process/process_areas/implementation/guidance/cpp/code_analysis.rst

..
   # *******************************************************************************
   # Copyright (c) 2025 Contributors to the Eclipse Foundation
   #
   # See the NOTICE file(s) distributed with this work for additional
   # information regarding copyright ownership.
   #
   # This program and the accompanying materials are made available under the
   # terms of the Apache License Version 2.0 which is available at
   # https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
   #
   # SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
   # *******************************************************************************

Code Analysis C++
#################

.. gd_guidl:: Static Code Analysis
   :id: gd_guidl__cpp__code_analysis
   :status: valid

>    :complies: std_req__iso26262__software_1, std_req__iso26262__software_2, std_req__iso26262__software_3, std_req__iso26262__software_31

Reviewer: 1) I assume these refer to the 2018 version? It's not mentioned anywhere.
2) in the past we had the number in the ids. Now I don't know what 1,2,3,31 refer to. Page numbers?

   Guideline for Static Code Analysis

Static Code Analysis
====================

> In order to fulfil standard requirements a concept for *Static Code Analysis* needs to be established. Input for this is based upon *MISRA* and *ISO26262*.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about the order/introduction here. Before talking about static code analysis, we need to talk about coding rules, or a "language subset".
MISRA defines such a language subset for C++.
Static code analysis tool support checking, that only that subset has indeed been used.

Reviewer: Ah just found the second file. Some reference is missing.

--> Static code analysis tools support checking compliance to the :ref:codeing_guidelines.

> *MISRA* introduces coding rules which need to be implemented and enforced. Checking those rules can partially be automated and implemented by a combination of different tools. Thus a mapping needs to be established which provides a linkage of all *MISRA* requirements to the respective tool requirements/rules. For *MISRA C++:2023* this mapping is established: :need:`here <gd_guidl__cpp__misra2023_rule_mapping>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*MISRA* introduces coding rules for C++. As MISRA is mostly accepted as an industry standard, SCORE needs to adhere to those rules. Checking those rules can partially be automated and implemented by a combination of different tools. Thus a mapping needs to be established which provides a linkage of all *MISRA* requirements to the respective tool requirements/rules. For *MISRA C++:2023* this mapping is established: :need:`here <gd_guidl__cpp__misra2023_rule_mapping>`
```

> *MISRA* introduces coding rules which need to be implemented and enforced. Checking those rules can partially be automated and implemented by a combination of different tools. Thus a mapping needs to be established which provides a linkage of all *MISRA* requirements to the respective tool requirements/rules. For *MISRA C++:2023* this mapping is established: :need:`here <gd_guidl__cpp__misra2023_rule_mapping>`

Reviewer: MISRA belongs to the coding guidelines document, not here.

> Additionally several other SW Analyses are required by *ISO26262*. Together with the *MISRA* rules those can be fulfilled by following toolset:

Reviewer: We'll need a mapping for these as well.

.. needuml::

   object "Static Code Analysis" as static
   object "Clang-Tidy" as ct
   object "Compiler Warnings" as cw
   object gcc
   object clang
   object "Coverity" as cov

   static --> ct
   static --> cw
   cw --> gcc
   cw --> clang

>    static --> cov

Reviewer: You need some sort of explanation why these tools were chosen. Why so many. Why two compilers. etc

Dynamic Code Analysis
=====================

> A dynamic code analysis is not explicitly required by a standard. However to provide a sufficient good SW quality following tools should be used to catch most common errors:

Reviewer: Did you mean any standard? However that's quite a lot of standards... 
"Any of the score relevant standards"?

```suggestion
A dynamic code analysis is not explicitly required by any standard. However to provide a sufficient good SW quality following tools should be used to catch most common errors:
```

.. needuml::

   object "Dynamic Code Analysis" as dynamic
   object "Sanitizers" as sanitizers
   object "gcc" as gcc
   object "ASAN/LSAN" as asan
   object "TSAN" as tsan
   object "UBSAN" as ubsan
   object "Memcheck" as memcheck

   dynamic --> sanitizers
   sanitizers --> gcc
   gcc --> asan
   gcc --> tsan
   gcc --> ubsan

>    sanitizers --> memcheck

Reviewer: An alternative to memheck is to use clang:
```
   clang --> asan
   clang --> tsan
   clang --> ubsan
   clang --> msan
```

Following sections provide a short overview of the most important features of each applied tool:

> Memcheck

Reviewer 2: back in the day I was using `Valgrind` - of which Memcheck is part of. It supports additional tools for dynamic checks.

Reviewer: We can use this document as a base for discussions (but that's not mentioned anywhere). Otherwise I do indeed miss decision records for all the tools.

The features mentioned here are indeed also covered by valgrind. Or clang.

A decision record can be as short as "we chose memcheck since we have experience with it" or "we chose clang since we have it anyway". But some reasoning would be nice.

Author: True, but I would do this in another document once discussion finishes

Author: https://github.com/eclipse-score/score/issues/656

--------
* Use of non initialized memory
* Read- and write access on released memory
* Writing out of bounds of memory sections
* Memory Leaks

`Full description: Memcheck <https://valgrind.org/docs/manual/mc-manual.html#mc-manual.overview>`_

Thread Sanitizer (TSAN)
-----------------------
* Detect Data Races between Threads

`Full description: TSAN <https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/threadsanitizercppmanual>`_

Undefined Behaviour Sanitizer (UBSAN)
-------------------------------------
Detect undefined behaviour, e.g.

* array out of bounds
* null pointer dereferencing
* integer overflow
* conversions which would lead to overflow

Adress/ Leak Sanitizer (ASAN/LSAN)
----------------------------------

If both tools are combined at runtime memory leaks and the corresponding address can be investigated.

Coverage
========

> As required by the verification guideline coverage needs to be calculated for the code which is used in the project. For a release the coverage needs to be calculated on the target (QNX). However for development also a quicker approach on the host shall be available.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why QNX is mentioned  in here.

Reviewer 3: QNX is not target meant in ISO26262, we need here reference HW coverage

> As required by the verification guideline coverage needs to be calculated for the code which is used in the project. For a release the coverage needs to be calculated on the target (QNX). However for development also a quicker approach on the host shall be available.

Reviewer: > For a release the coverage needs to be calculated on the target (QNX).

I'm not sure, but I don't think so. See 26262 9.4.5

To enable this, following tools shall be used:

.. needuml::

   object "Coverage" as coverage
   object "gtest" as gtest
   object "gcov + gcovr" as gcov
   object "host" as host
   object "QNX" as qnx

   coverage --> gtest
   gtest --> gcov
   gcov --> host

>    gcov --> qnx

Reviewer 3: qnx -> reference HW

Reviewer: "reference system" ?!
